Hello, welcome to this month's Asking a Doctor. My name is Andrew Murray. For those of you
who perhaps have never listened to the show, they run from 7 till 8pm every third Friday
of the month. And from 7.30 typically until 8 o'clock, we invite callers to a call in
with questions related to the month's subject. The toll free number is 1-800-568-3723. That's
1-800-KMUD-RAD. And if you're in the 707 area code, the number is 707-923-3911. Well,
I think I should probably start off, it's January 2018, Happy New Year. Nice and cold
outside, certainly not very environmentally enrichening. But I'm sure there's plenty of
things that can be done. And I know we're probably going to get into some of the things
as a recap on environmental enrichment. But this month's subject is going to be, I won't
say specifically for the ladies out there, but a lot of what we're going to talk to Dr.
Peat tonight about is related to female hormones. And whilst progesterone is not typically female,
it is produced by males, progesterone as a topic of discussion tonight will run through
many of the disorders that we're going to cover. And some in particular, I wanted just
to highlight again, the difficulty if you are looking online for information, I mean,
the internet is an excellent source, but it's also a good source of disinformation. So you
have to be really careful where you pick your narrative. Typically, clinical journals and
clinical trial published information is also skewed. You can't always take it on face value
that that result is actually what happened. So we're going to get into a couple of instances
where some very prominent peer reviewed trials with thousands of people, I mean, huge cohorts
of people that were involved in these trials to try and demonstrate an effect. And particularly
with regard to progesterone, the effects of progesterone on traumatic brain injury are
one of those things we're going to look at. And then we're going to look at things like
the effect on cognitive impairment. We're going to look at the effects on Alzheimer's
and other neurodegenerative disorders, and then postpartum depression and epilepsy, menstrual
related epilepsy, catamenial epilepsy, and then sleep apnea. So I'm sure from a perspective
of postpartum and progesterone for the women who have had maybe PMS symptoms or estrogen
excess symptoms, which are going to be very much tied to tonight's discussion, who suffer
with polycystic ovaries, you know, what they call breast mice. So cysts, cystic formations,
obviously endometriosis, and then difficulty conceiving. So if those females are listening,
if it's pretty sure interest, there's a lot that can be done about this. I graduated 20
years ago now, with an honors degree in herbal medicine, and I've worked with Dr. Peat here
for the last nine to 10 years. And a lot of what we found out from Dr. Peat has been pretty
revelational because when I was studying herbal medicine in England, even the medical literature,
and we were trained by doctors and endocrinologists and pathologists and all the other ologists,
but they all came out of a medical background. We weren't really taught by holistic practitioners
apart from maybe the materia medica side of the, you know, the education. So we were taught
by doctors and we had gynecologists and physiologists and pathologists. So, but they have the same
kind of medical background and a lot of the, a lot of the things we learned, I've later
found out from Dr. Peat and from doing research online, looking to see deeper, there actually
is quite a lot of untruth in what we were told as is what's good for you. So hopefully
these shows are all online. Our website, which is www.westernbotanicalmedicine.com, there's
a resource tab and every one of the shows that we've recorded with Dr. Peat here since
2008 are there. I think there may be the last one or two months that's yet to be put up,
but essentially it's a great resource and it's free. So people should definitely go
there and look at that. And then obviously Dr. Peat's website, and he's very much somebody
I want to support fully. His website is referenced with lots and lots of articles. All of these
articles I should say are fully referenced. So his specialty, I'll just introduce him
here in a second and he can just give you his bio, but I know people that are listening
who probably tuned in just for the show know him, but there's always people that I come
across who've not heard him before. And so obviously he's a great resource to further
learn and relearn some untruths that we've been brainwashed with. So I don't see the
engineers talking to somebody. I don't know if he's talking to Dr. Peat or not. Let me
just see if he's there. I'm here. Oh, hi, Dr. Peat. Well, thanks so much for joining
us again. As always, I know some people have mentioned on the forums that your bio, they've
heard it all before, but you know what? There's people that haven't heard you. So I'm just
going to carry on as usual and please ask you to give a background, your academic background
and your research since then. My PhD study was at the University of Oregon in 1968 to
72. My dissertation was on reproductive aging. And my intention when I went back to graduate
school in biology was to study the brain, but I found that the brain research was the
most doctrinaire next to genetics. And so I looked around and found that the reproductive
physiology was actually oriented towards science. And my background before that had been studying
literature, linguistics and painting. And it's probably the background in literature
that made me think in an adversarial manner in evaluating science rather than an authoritarian
except because the professor said it's true. I think the legal attitude of looking for
truth by an adversarial approach should apply to medicine and science in general.
Okay, well, good. So as I was preparing material, excuse me, for this evening's show, I was
looking at initially, I wanted to ask you kind of go through a list of disorders that
I have that will all be found to be linked, but didn't necessarily want to bounce around
all of them in describing one at a time. And I started off with looking at the evidence,
again, wanting to be just like you very scientifically oriented here and looking for truth in science
and wanting and expecting good science to reveal the truth, which it will do impartially.
And it's a reproducible event, which is a defining marker of good science. About traumatic
brain injury, and I never actually realized that the numbers were so huge, the amount
of people actually suffering with traumatic brain injury, whether these are people that
play in professional soccer or boxing or people that get in auto wrecks, or people that fall
off of, you know, buildings and ladders and the numbers are pretty staggering. And actually,
it's been one of the most difficult to treat conditions. I mean, I never really think I
never thought about it really too much until I started plunging into the papers around
the subject, but traumatic brain injury is not very well treated. And there, whilst there
have been some very good phase one and two trials, using progesterone, which is going
to be the topic of tonight, woven in many different diseases or pathologies, that although
the trial one and two trial results were very promising, and they spurred the phase three
trials which had huge numbers, cohort numbers of 10,000 in one of them and 1000 or 1500
in the other. Both of these studies and we'll go on to describe them so people can take
a look at it themselves. Both these studies seemingly found no benefit. Now, I know, you've
described at length the anti inflammatory and anti edema to main mentioned just a couple
of the effects of progesterone. But the swelling that occurs in traumatic brain injury is one
of the main contributors of all the damage along with course, with all the leakage and
the inflammatory cytokines that are released as a process of cell breakdown and rupture.
So given that, given that the phase one and two trials were so promising and spurred the
call for a phase three trial, I read both of the most recent ones, the PROTECT-3 and
the SYNAPSE trial on progesterone for severe traumatic brain injury saying that there was
no beneficial effect when and we'll bring this out in a little bit after you've described
perhaps your understanding of progesterone and how you definitely would advocate progesterone
for swelling and then we'll go, you know, bounce around the production, the endogenous
production of progesterone because it's very, very different to estrogen. For example, being
produced in the CNS and the brain cell astrocytes and oligodendrocytes as well as gonads, etc.
So, this, the main study here showed no benefit and it's almost just yet another, gosh, just
another closed door if you like. I find more and more as I talk to you and as I look at
papers myself that they're really, and I won't, you know, that word conspiracy is thrown around
so much I know, but there does seem to be a real, a real work to undo progesterone's
good because in the study, given they did a 120-hour study for this particular application
of progesterone, they said there was no benefit in reducing swelling or outcome, but a later
piece of work that was done when both of these phase 3 trials didn't seem to show any benefit
was refuted by a professor of neuros, well, actually he's a, working for the Emory University.
He's basically just been studying brain trauma for the last 20, 30 years, so it's his specialty.
He's actually revealed some of the faults of the study that are definitely noteworthy.
So I was going to start the questioning here to you in terms of progesterone and its beneficial
effects. How do you interpret this negative effect that was shown in the trials in comparison
to truly what progesterone is capable of doing?
There have been, I think it was about 15 big studies on brain injury and interestingly
after overwhelmingly promising results from, for example, using intravenous magnesium to
reduce swelling and restore metabolism, all of these, by the time they reached the phase
3 level, suddenly the results were the opposite and nothing turned out to be beneficial for
treating human brain trauma, even though the previous smaller studies and many, many animal
studies were showing overwhelming good increased survival, increased full recovery and so on.
And the fact that something happens at the phase 3 level, I think is very suspicious
when the government and big corporations get involved. I suspect that they really are protecting
drugs that are not generic the way progesterone is. Urea, I don't think there's ever been
a major study of treating brain trauma with simply intravenous urea, but it has had just
amazingly good results and I think probably a serious study could be done using all of
the known beneficial things, urea, magnesium, progesterone, hypertonic saline solution and
so on. I think if you do everything that's known to be beneficial to the brain, you would
get even better results than with a single drug-like treatment. The worst thing about
this big Protect study, I think, was that they not only didn't give a big enough dose,
but they gave it emulsified with, I think it was intralipid soybean oil. And the amount
of soybean emulsion that they were giving intravenously in the animal studies, it in
itself is harmful.
Yeah, it was a 6% solution.
I think it was about 1970, someone injected emulsified soy oil into rats and showed that
on the first pass through the brain, 17% of the oil was taken up into the brain. There's
no blood brain barrier that functions against oil. And then they dissected the brain and
showed that one dose of oil was enough to alter the morphology of brain cells. So intravenous
treatment with something supposedly beneficial with a known toxin to the brain with a long
history of evidence, it's hard to imagine how corporate and government interest putting
millions of dollars into the project could have been that ignorant.
Okay, and the other thing I noticed on that trial, you mentioned the 6% soybean oil that
they used. They were only using 2mg of progesterone per milliliter for the active treatment. And
then the drug infusion was started intravenously with a loading dose of 0.71mg per kilo body
weight per hour for one hour followed by 0.5mg per kilo per hour for the rest of the 119
hours.
So they were getting 2mg of progesterone per milliliter. And I'd like you to put this in
perspective for people that are listening because maybe people don't quite understand
the normal values that females are exposed to during the menstrual cycle and/or pregnancy.
So 2mg of progesterone per milliliter, so basically 0.5mg per kilo per hour for 120
hours. So would you put either 0.5mg or 2mg in perspective of the progesterone exposure
that most females enjoy?
Some people have reported that in the last week or two of a healthy pregnancy, a woman's
placenta is producing 800-900mg of progesterone per day. And that doesn't do anything potentially
harmful. It's very protective. Women generally feel great the last two or three weeks when
their progesterone is at a maximum. So they could easily have given 2000mg of progesterone
per day instead of a few hundred milligrams.
Right. Well, this was 2mg. So yeah, 2mg per hour. Okay, crazy. So that brings me on to
the next thing. And it took a long time to find this because there's a lot of information,
re-repeated information, information that people are quoting from this same study to
say that progesterone is not effective for traumatic brain injury. Hundreds and hundreds
and hundreds and very little actual pro-supportive evidence for progesterone's anti-inflammatory
effect and brain edema decreasing effect. But one person in particular, this particular
doctor who was studying this at Emory University, and his name is Donald Stein. He published
a couple of articles back in 2013 when he was very hopeful that this phase 3 trial was
going to show very positive results for progesterone. And I think it took maybe 18 months to 2 years
afterwards for him to publish this latest paper in the Journal of Neurotrauma dated
June 1st, 2017. And it's titled Suboptimal Dosing Parameters as Possible Factors in the
Negative Phase 3 Clinical Trials of Progesterone for Traumatic Brain Injury. And it's about
a 4-page article basically refuting the dose that was given. And as you mentioned, the
emulsifying agent, the polyunsaturated fat that was used, the soybean oil that was used
as part of the carrier, certainly bringing its own negative inflammatory effects. And
you've always talked about PUFAs as being pro-estrogenic. And estrogen obviously is
a known water logger, both of neurons and cells. And so all of this is working against
any tiny dose of progesterone that was part of the trial. So just again, for people that
are listening, it's very difficult sometimes to wade through all this material and find
the facts because a lot of it is being promoted by pretty vested interests that are plugged
into many different levels of academia with people doing follow-up research to get their
PhDs, etc. And we all know from what you've mentioned and from personal experience of
people that have been in academia that there is this real egocentric mentality running
through the departments and obviously funding that runs through those same mentalities that
people don't want to give up. And so it's very difficult sometimes to find objective
truth, but it is out there. And so that's what this show has been around for a long
time is to have you on the show and get you to refute what have been believed innocently,
I think for the longest time because we've been taught it and we think these people are
telling the truth, but your research shows otherwise.
You mentioned the estrogenic effect of polyunsaturated fats. When there's a trauma, the toxicity
of the polyunsaturated fats is tremendously amplified by their conversion to the pro-inflammatory
prostaglandins. And in any trauma, not just trauma, but any harmful experience of an organism,
estrogen is produced in the injured tissue and in the whole organism. It can be sunburn
or parasites in the intestine or broken bone, x-ray treatment, any harm you can think of
due to the organism is going to increase the estrogen production and the conversion of
polyunsaturated fats to the pro-inflammatory mediators.
Right. So this is what you would term or literature would term the ex-cyto-toxic situation.
Part of it, that's an even more specific part that happens under the influence of estrogen
and polyunsaturated fats. They activate the glutamatergic transmitters in the brain, these
literally excitatory signals to the point that they become toxic. Progesterone opposes
all of these, not just the direct anti-estrogen effect, but it blocks the formation of prostaglandins,
blocks the release of the stored polyunsaturated fats, blocks the formation of other inflammatory
mediators and antagonizes the glutamatergic ex-cyto-toxins. Every function of the organism
you can think of that's harmed by trauma is intensified by estrogen and polyunsaturated
fats and those are blocked by progesterone.
Okay. All right. So you're listening to Ask Your Ob-Doctor, KMU DeGalbaville, 91.1 FM
from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock. People are invited to call in with questions
either related or unrelated to this month's subject of progesterone and its treatment
for traumatic brain injury. We're going to look at cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's,
we're going to touch on that a little, postpartum depression, that's quite interesting from
a female perspective, postpartum, catamenial epilepsy, which is a menstrual cycle related
epilepsy and sleep apnea and how progesterone and CO2 have interrelated effects. So the
number if you're in the area is 923 3911 or if you're in the outside area or indeed out
of the States, which has happened many times, there's an 800 number, 1-800-568-3723. So
we will take your calls from 7.30 on. I saw the lights flashing here just a bit ago. I
don't know if you've got anybody on at this point. Maybe not. Maybe taking questions.
Okay, we can always go back to him if he's there. Okay, he's there. Let's take this first
call. A caller, you're on the air. Where are you from? What's your question?
My name is Jeff from New York. I was listening to the comment about progesterone and progesterone
is I guess the miracle product, but does it only apply to women? Because I think you've
mentioned in the past that pregnenolone is sort of universal, but progesterone men have
to be careful about. And I'm not talking about like a 25-year-old, I'm talking about like
a 55 to 70-year-old where the risk of endotoxins is increasing just with basic age. So that's
one question that I had. The other one is with regard to salt and insomnia, I was actually
using sea salt and I switched over, having read your forum, to canning salt or actually
kosher salt, which is pure salt, doesn't have any other minerals in it. And I actually think
it really helped. I'm just wondering if you would agree with that and sort of why, because
I don't seem to be waking up at three o'clock in the morning anymore. I seem to be able
to sleep through the night. So it might not be the only item, but anyway, that was the
second question. Thank you. Okay, I'll let Dr. Peat ask the progesterone,
answer the progesterone question with men and progesterone, how safe is it? But I will
quickly just say the whole thing about salt and natural salt and Himalayan salts and deep
earth crystal salts, the fact is they do contain a lot of other trace elements and other negative
material. And I think that could be in part why there may be disruptions going on on a
hormonal level in a type of endocrine fashion with very small picogram concentrations of
very questionable heavy metals and other products that can be present in the salt.
So all of those colored salts and Himalayan salts, etc. typically have other particles
within them that are not beneficial. And so I think just like Dr. Peat is talking about white
sugar being good, it's not opposed to white sugar at all. And I think you find the caramelization
product of any organic or brown sugars may be more detrimental than just straight white
sugar for its own sake. So you agree with kosher salt? Canning salts are the same and
that's the product that would be most efficacious for this type of program? Yeah, I would say
that a straightforward white sea salt. Again, I guess I have to question that because sea
salt has its own elements within it that we know are not particularly good for you. But
a white sea salt is particularly what we use. What do you think about iodine? Not a good
product to supplement with. Obviously in terms of any Fukushima fallout or that kind of thing.
And obviously there's a rationale for it for getting it taken up into the thyroid gland
so that the radioactive material doesn't collect there. But yeah, Dr. Peat, what do you think
about progesterone in men? Well, first I'd like to comment that my interest in salt supplementation
was related to the estrogen issue because I saw premenstrual women restricting their
salt and making their symptoms worse. I suggested to a friend that she salt her food to taste
and suddenly she didn't retain water. Salt was acting as a diuretic. And then years later
I knew old people who were restricting salt and developing serious insomnia and not improving
their blood pressure. So I suggested the same thing to them. And again, they went to sleep,
got good sleep suddenly and their blood pressure actually came down. And then I realized that
Tom Brewer with his diet for pregnant women in the 1950s and 60s had seen the same thing
that some people he collaborated with supplemented pregnant women with toxemia symptoms with
huge amounts of salt daily and their toxemia essentially was cured. That's Shanklin and
Houghton's book. Anyway, the progesterone, I used it myself after I had worked with it
in aging animals. I tried it on my own migraines and twice having a very intense migraine,
I had complete reversal of the symptoms from one to two minutes from a total migraine to
total wellness after ingesting about 100 milligrams I guess it was. And that was what really got
me interested in describing it to other people. And when I took too much for too long, I noticed
that it had the effect of a cold shower for a day or two, an antitestosterone effect,
but that passes quickly when you stop taking it. And I found as I got older that I could
tolerate five milligrams or 10 milligrams a day without that antitestosterone effect.
Several people have told me that it actually seems to reinforce their testosterone. And
I think that works because testosterone when you're under stress is being converted to
estrogen and if you stop that conversion with progesterone, progesterone like aspirin inhibits
the conversion of testosterone to estrogen. You can actually raise your testosterone by
blocking that conversion of stress.
That's very interesting. The question on iodine a moment ago, I know you've mentioned that
taking a very small amount or even a seemingly small amount can be toxic, but that was in
an experiment. So as you probably have written and incredibly articulately, and I don't want
to make you put a little comp, but quickly the fluoridation of the water is something
that Americans just literally can't escape. So I'm just wondering outside the laboratory,
does more iodine make sense in the context of an environment where you're so exposed
to fluoridated water that you can't really escape it? Is it counteracted? Maybe would
suggest more than a small dose to offset the fluoride that you're probably consuming without
your knowledge?
I've never seen a test of that idea. I think it should be tested. When I spent some time
in San Francisco without thinking about the fluoridation of water there, I was using a
daily supplement of T3, Cytomel, and within a few days I developed a migraine, which made
me assume it was a sudden crash of my thyroid function. So I looked up the interaction.
If you take T3 with fluoridated water, if it's in your stomach at the same time, the
amount of fluoride in the water will totally knock out the dose you're taking. But I think
there is some effect once it gets in your body as long as it's circulating as ionic
fluoride. I think it will knock out any T3 that it runs into.
That's great. I have just one last question if I may. On amino acids, you say like gelatin,
you're better off taking gelatin because that's how you get your proline and your glycine.
It's more bioavailable and cleaner without any additives. But there are some isolated
amino acids like taurine, which I think in and of itself may be extremely therapeutic
and perhaps reduces stress. And the other one that I was interested in is carnosine,
not carnitine, which you've written well on, but carnosine seems to be a long list
of benefits. Do the possible risks of additives, are they potentially offset by the fact that
those two particular amino acids have a laundry list of benefits?
Yeah. I don't discourage people from taking those if they want to try them, but I don't
use them myself.
Okay. Well, yeah. Okay. One last question. I am holding my breath for two minutes at
the best with my -- take a breath and you let all the air out and you hold it for a
minute and a half, my maximum is two minutes. And then you take one breath in and you hold
it for a minute to a minute and a half. When I do that, and I have -- sometimes I can do
it better than others, it seems that that might be a good proxy for bag breathing or
swimming or whatever to increase your CO2. And is that something that if you practice
it over a period of time, as an older person, you can reduce the systemic stress to your
body, you know, as opposed to putting your whole body in a bag of CO2 gas?
Yeah. Holding your breath does have its value, but the amount of time you hold it depends
on your metabolic rate. If you have a high thyroid function, you might be unconscious
after a minute of breath holding.
So you have a high metabolic rate or low?
If you have a high metabolic rate and you're producing CO2 and consuming oxygen very fast,
the fall off of oxygen supply to your brain is going to be twice as fast as the average
person and four times as fast as a hypothyroid person. So if you have a high metabolic rate,
you don't want to force yourself to go two minutes.
Is there a good average for someone who's like modestly hypothyroid? I mean, as you
get older, everyone becomes hypothyroid, right, to some extent. So, I mean, not to pin you
down, but like doing it a minute a day, you know, is that a good target? Like 30, 60 seconds?
Because it's not hard, it's not easy. It's just something you can do and seems to certainly
feel relaxed afterward. I mean, you feel like your blood vessels literally are relaxed.
It's a very odd feeling.
A very high proportion of the population is breathing too fast, hyperventilating. So it's
beneficial for most people to hold their breath or breathe slower to some extent, but there's
no way without doing an oxygen consumption test that you can tell exactly how many seconds
you should hold it.
Gotcha, gotcha. I gotcha. But I think that's a good point. If you're doing it and you reduce
the number of breaths you take during a normal minute without thinking about it, then you've
improved. There's some benefit, right, because you're taking fewer breaths per minute.
Yeah.
Okay. Thanks for your call. We do have another caller on the line waiting to get on in. So
let's make sure they get the opportunity. You're on the air. Where are you from? What's
your question?
Yes. Hi, this is, I'm calling from Finland.
Finland.
And I'm always very grateful for your show and, you know, just learning so much. My question
is unrelated to this week's topic. It's basically prompted by a recent book in French by a doctor
who founded the Oxidative Stress College. And so I'd like to know if this whole white
fat, brown fat thing is good science. What I found in the book, which just came out recently,
this is why I dare to mention it, is basically the assumption from this doctor that, you
know, you cannot get rid or it's almost impossible to get rid of white fat. You just accumulate
it. And the only one thing that they mentioned would be to use cold. But I know that in past
shows it has been told that, you know, the stress created by applying cold, you know,
makes it almost worse than not applying it. So this would be one of the questions. And
my other question is I've seen a study, basically it's on mice, so I don't know if it's applicable,
if it's good science either for men, but that's also goes as far to say that starvation or
fasting actually, not starvation, fasting would actually reverse the thing. So basically
turn good brown fat into bad white fat. So any opinions on this would be appreciated.
Thank you again. So Dr. Peat, what do you have to say about brown
versus white fat? I mean, there is a lot of good, interesting research on that. And my
orientation to it is that the activation of T3, the active thyroid hormone, is the crucial
thing and that yes, stress will prolong fasting is going to have a lot of harmful counterproductive
effects. And one of those is that it knocks out the T3 in the various tissues, even though
the T3 that circulates in the bloodstream is two thirds of it roughly is produced in
the liver and about a third in the thyroid gland. But the various tissues of the body,
muscles, skin, kidneys, brain, all of the tissues that have been studied are able to
produce T3 from T4 locally to supplement whatever can get in from the bloodstream. So that even
if your circulation isn't delivering enough T3, your tissue is able to produce it itself.
And the crucial factor for producing it locally in the tissue, it's partly glucose, but fructose
seems to have a special ability to activate that tissue, local production of T3. And so
I would say that eating enough sugar, having your orange juice and other fruit regularly
throughout the day is much better than either chilling yourself or starving yourself.
Okay.
And may I just ask one more thing, just very quickly. If you were to choose a place to
live just based on trying to get your metabolism high, would it be safe to say that you would
choose a high altitude, warm, the warmest place at high altitude or?
Yeah, like Peru.
Am I getting this right?
Somewhere in Peru on a maybe 12 to 14,000 foot elevation near the equator.
How about Mauna Loa, Dr. Peat?
I don't know how high it is.
I think it's about 8 or 9,000.
Oh yeah, I like Toluca, Mexico. A little chilly, but I really feel exhilarated at that altitude
and I think it's better to be a little higher, 12,000 or so.
Probably less chance of getting bombed by the Koreans too. Anyway, thanks for your call,
caller.
Thanks very much for taking my call.
Okay, so for people who'd like to call in, the 800 number is 1-800-568-3723. Dr. Raymond
Peat sharing his wisdom with us, going through the motions of how progesterone is demonized
time and time again, both in the literature and by corporate scientific interests.
So Dr. Peat, I wanted to talk about the GABA receptor, excuse me, the GABA-A receptor in
particular. I know that this is the receptor which progesterone and its metabolite allopregnanolone,
which apparently is one of the more active metabolites, but that may just be hearsay
too. I don't know what you have to say about allopregnanolone. These bind to the same GABA
receptor producing that anxiolytic, that kind of calm, peaceful type nervous response because
they block the excitatory stimulation and that Valeriana aficionadis, common valerian
does just that and I remember very clearly some of our first Materia Medica that was
taught to us about valerian and GABA receptors and chloride channels, etc. and how the whole
exocytation is calmed down.
So in terms of the GABA channel, GABA receptor and progesterone or allopregnanolone's activity,
do you think the metabolite is more active than progesterone per se or do you think progesterone
itself is still a good anxiolytic and calming agent? We talked about anti-inflammatory,
anti-edema.
Since prognanolone, the precursor for progesterone itself is pro-GABA, I suspect that progesterone
in itself is, but it is converted, reduced chemically to form allopregnanolone and that
seems to be the most powerful activator of the GABA system in the brain, but I think
all of them are acting in the same direction and besides acting to reduce stress and excitation
by activating GABA, progesterone also inhibits several of the excitatory processes including
the glutamatergic and NMDA receptor systems.
Okay, we do have another caller, so let me hold your train of thought there before I
question you some more. Caller, you're on the airwave. Where are you from and what's
your question?
Yeah, Buffalo, John.
Buffalo, New York?
Yeah.
Two callers from New York in one night.
Yeah, I had a question about the spine. So if someone has a disc herniation, so it either
dries up or the gel breaks through, is it practically possible to regenerate that particular
gel? Because I know you've mentioned, I think it's some studies that have been done where
people have seen regeneration of different parts of the body, although it sounds crazy,
but it seems like you said it's been done. So is it possible for the space between the
disc vertebrae to regenerate?
Dr. Peat, what do you think about that with that nucleus pulposus? Do you think that's
possible to regenerate that? I'm sure you do, but...
Yeah, I know people get well from it, but I've never seen x-ray evidence that they actually
spaced out the distance between the vertebrae. I don't know whether the bones themselves
can adjust. So I think it would be possible for the disc to rebuild itself and for the
bones to conform themselves to the regenerating cartilage disc.
I'm sure you'd probably advocate the use of progesterone in and of itself for...
And thyroid.
Yeah.
I've heard and seen knee joints and shoulder joints that were making noise and causing
relative immobility to the person to heal themselves from an hour to overnight, a completely
functionless knee recuperated to the point that the guy had to come to the house just
to run up and down my stairs to show what had happened to his knee.
Well, this is just sort of a testimony. I've had six knee operations and three herniated
discs and I'm over 60. And by being on your diet and mitigating PUFA primarily and trying
to do the other stuff that you talk about, I almost have no pain. I must say though,
the red light is my go-to thing. If things go bad, the red light kind of just eliminates
pain almost immediately. I can't say that for the other products you speak about, but
I believe the progesterone. I just don't know much about it, but the red light has been
amazing.
Have you ever tried applying a progesterone-based oil to the area on your spine where you say
you have a herniated disc? Have you tried that? And I don't know if you're using aspirin
as an anti-inflammatory compound to reduce swelling. Obviously, that's a primary importance
during that type of repair.
It's funny you mentioned that because I did run today and I literally put a paper towel
in that aspirin solution that Dr. Peat had previously suggested. So I do do that. I do believe it.
It doesn't just help locally, but I think based on what I've read in his aspirin articles,
it actually helps systemically in a body temperature metabolism. It's just like aspirin is kind
of an unappreciated product as you've well documented.
But no, I've never tried progesterone on the spine, but I remember in one of your programs,
I believe, or another one that Dr. Peat said you can put progesterone on like a mole or
maybe you were talking about that or DHA and you put it near a mole and it moved around
and eventually it got better. Is that also possible?
Putting it next to the mole, the pigment cells are extremely mobile. If your skin is warm,
like in summer, they can travel through your skin close to an inch per day. And if you
know what they're looking for, depending on whether it's on your forehead or your wrist
or your chest, if you put it in the right place, they will apparently satisfy their
need for the progesterone or DHA and leave, go back to where they should be to keep your
hair pigmented, for example.
So the mole just kind of breaks up because the pigment sort of doesn't clump together?
Yeah, the cells congregate because they're deprived of something where they came from.
For example, on my temple, I applied, I forget which was DHA or progesterone on the front
side and the next day there was a ring of pigment cells nearly an inch to the back side
and the mole itself had shrunk. The second day I applied another dab in front of it and
the following day there was like a bullseye, two brown rings spaced out in a curved line
behind it and the mole itself was again smaller. And I kept doing that and within a few days,
a red, shiny blood vessel constricted the base. It had been as big as a dime and it
constricted down to about the diameter of a matchstick and then dried up and fell off
and didn't leave a scar.
Wow. Well, thank you. Andrew had mentioned about GABA and so it just sparked a question
based on his comment. Is GABA something you can take as a supplement or does that mess
up the rest of your neurotransmitters? Because I know people say, "Oh, you can take B6 and
it gets your dopamine up," but doesn't that mess up the balance? How do you deal with
that?
In animal studies, when they gave it to a healthy animal, none of it seemed to get into
the brain. But if the animal had been sleep-deprived, so its brain really needed GABA and was in
an excited state, then the GABA was able to get in the brain and relax it.
Okay, we do have another caller, so let's make sure we get this. Thanks for your caller
call. I don't mean to cut you off so quick, but we do have another one. And where are
you from and what's your question?
Dr. Peat, hello. My name's Chris. I'm calling from Garboville, California in southern Humboldt
County. I've tried something called monk fruit sugar, which you may be familiar with. Okay,
monk fruit sugar is a melon and it comes from southern China. I recently found out about
it and about three months ago I purchased two pounds of it and I stopped eating table
sugar, entirely granulated white table sugar, thank goodness, and brown table sugar. Went
to this organic product, tried it, ate like a pound and a half of it over a month, just
you know, putting it on cereal and etc. And all the pain in my body, I think from the
sugar inflammation, absolutely disappeared, including like the toes and extremities. I'm
63 years old, I'm a big guy, but I'm in the process of losing a considerable amount of
weight. And why I'm telling you about monk fruit sugar is I seem to be progressively
losing weight. I'm interested in knowing about the anti-inflammatories. I also have been
promoting stevia sugar on another radio station in San Francisco called KGO about 15 years
ago and it's kind of taken over in America because of its anti-inflammatory low glycemic
index, actually zero glycemic. Monk fruit sugar, if you go online and look at it, zero
glycemic, it's almost exactly like white table sugar, tastes the same, but it's zero glycemic.
So any diabetics out there might want to try monk fruit sugar, which you can buy at local
health food stores. It's more expensive, but boy, talk about prevention and a pound of
cure and all that. What do you think of this? Have you heard of this product, Dr. Peat? The
effect that I was describing of ordinary sucrose, for example, in orange juice is able to stimulate
weight loss by activating the T3 in your fat cells. So fructose is available at health
food stores in the pure form. If a person is diabetic, that doesn't increase the blood
glucose, the weight. Are you still with me? Yes. Okay. What I'm telling you about this
monk fruit sugar, MONK fruit sugar, is that it's zero glycemic. It seems to go in and
everybody in America, everybody in the world has eaten table sugar over a lifetime. But
what does it contain? I don't know. It's a melon, but I don't know what the constituencies
of it is. I think it's mixed with erythritrol, which is the stevia product. But the monk
fruit, when I purchased it and ate it, and spent about two months now, I have absolutely
no problems with inflammation. It seems to have neutralized the inflammation. I have,
after that two months were over, I started eating white table sugar again and organic
brown sugar. And it absolutely has negated the effect, all the inflammatory effects of
that white sugar as I've been eating it. I was doing my own experimental study. So I've
been telling everybody about it that's overweight that they should go from eating granulated
cane sugar, table sugar, to this monk fruit sugar that's in melon form and zero glycemic.
Well, I'd be interested to know what constituents it has. As far as stevia is concerned, I think
it's a pretty toxic product. And like xylitol and all the other sugar substitutes, I do
believe that there's a lot more negative effects to them than any positive effects from any
lower calories or insulin sensitivity type reactions from their non-sugar sugar. But
I've never, yeah, I know there's lots of information out there that will say that sugar is toxic
or it's pure, white and deadly, etc. And we've totally visited it. And I don't think there's
any mileage in it. Not too sure why it is that you would have had your inflammation
clear up, but it's good that you did. Who knows what else is going on with you, with
your thyroid, etc. You said you were pretty large. I don't know if you have any metabolic
issues, maybe have some low thyroid situation happening with you. But typically, those situations
that do predispose to toxin buildup and that obviously has its effects as does weight on
the joints. So I think all of those things kind of work against you. But yeah, happy
that you got a reduction in your inflammation. But anyway, Dr. Peat, thank you very much for
joining the show again. Appreciate your time so much. And we didn't get through much this
evening, but I appreciate the call as I called. Perhaps we'll carry on next month and then
go on to another topic from there. Okay, very good. Thanks for your time. Okay, so people
that have tuned into this evening's show, if you place calls, thanks for your calls
and input. For people that want to find out more about Dr. Peat, www.rayPeate.com, fully
referenced scientific articles that have been produced and plenty of information and references
to back up what he's saying. Again, for those people who have listened to the show this
evening, the first part I was mentioning about the use of progesterone in traumatic brain
injury, do take a look at those two studies. One, excuse me, was the Synapse Study and
the other one was the PROTECT-3. Read them. I mean, they seem to show that there is no
benefit and yet Dr. Donald Stein has produced a paper here in 2017 in the Journal of Neurotrauma.
He's been a brain specialist for 30 years. That's all he's done. And his paper here,
I think, outlines quite clearly the shortfalls of the study and that actually progesterone
is a very good model for treating this kind of disorder. So there's certainly hope there
and progesterone has got a lot of other benefits that we didn't get into. I know we've mentioned
it on other shows but certainly not the product that the industry would like to tell you it
is because it's actually estrogen. So again, things back to front. Well, thanks for joining
us and till 7 o'clock next Thursday, the third Friday of the month from 7 till 8 p.m. my
name is Andrew Murray. If anybody wants to reach us, we have an 800 or 188 number, it's
888 WBMHERB or through our website which is westernbotanicalmedicine.com. So see you next